Shifts and unshifts of concepts around sequential colimits (#1070)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/papers/SDR20.lagda.md

# Sequential Colimits in Homotopy Type Theory

This file collects references to formalization of constructions and theorems
from {{#cite SDR20}}.

```agda

> module papers.SDR20 where

Reviewer: I'm wondering if it is better to use the paper title for the module name, as it is much more likely that a reader that is not already familiar with the article can recognize concepts from the title rather than from the citation tag.

```suggestion
module papers.sequential-colimits-in-homotopy-type-theory where
```

Author: IMO it's enough to have the title of the paper be the title of the page - it's at the top of the file and in the table of contents on the left

  )
open import foundation.univalence using
  ( univalence -- "the univalence axiom"
  ; map-eq -- "function p̅ associated to a path"
  )
open import foundation.function-extensionality using
  ( funext -- "the function extensionality axiom"
  )
open import foundation.fibers-of-maps using
  ( fiber -- "the homotopy fiber of a function"
  )
open import foundation.transport-along-identifications using
  ( tr -- "transport"
  )
open import foundation.action-on-identifications-dependent-functions using
  ( apd -- "dependent functions respect paths"
  )
open import foundation.truncated-types using
  ( is-trunc -- "`n`-truncated types"
  )
open import foundation.truncations using
  ( trunc -- "the `n`-truncation of a type"
  ; unit-trunc -- "the unit map into a type's `n`-truncation"
  ; is-truncation-trunc -- "precomposing by the unit is an equivalence"
  )
open import foundation.connected-types using
  ( is-connected -- "`n`-connected types"
  )
open import foundation.truncated-maps using
  ( is-trunc-map -- "`n`-truncated functions"
  )
open import foundation.connected-maps using
  ( is-connected-map -- "`n`-connected functions"
  )
```

## 3 Sequences and Sequential Colimits

> The third section defines what one might call the (wild) category of sequences
> (which are called _sequential diagrams_ in agda-unimath) and the colimiting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third section defines categorical properties of sequences
(called _sequential diagrams_ in agda-unimath) and the colimiting
```

functor. It concludes by defining shifts of sequences, showing that they induce
equivalences on sequential colimits, and defines lifts of elements in a
sequential diagram.

> **Definition 3.1**: Sequences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Definition 3.1.** Sequences.
```

Reviewer: We should also consider if these should just be third or fourth level section headers

Author: I tried both. I still prefer the current style, since we can have just a part of the line be bold, and I don't like that all the definitions and lemmas would show up in the right-side ToC. See the attached screenshot.

![20240322 134558 screen](https://github.com/UniMath/agda-unimath/assets/15523887/3372e279-2c17-46e8-89dd-e7d91dc044de)

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.sequential-diagrams using
  ( sequential-diagram
  )
```

> **Definition 3.2**: Sequential colimits and their induction and recursion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Definition 3.2.** Sequential colimits and their induction and recursion
```

principles.

Induction and recursion are given by the dependent and non-dependent universal
properties, respectively. Since we work in a setting without computational
higher inductive types, the maps induced by induction and recursion only compute
up to a path, even on points. Our homotopies in the definitions of cocones go
from left to right (i.e. `iₙ ~ iₙ₊₁ ∘ aₙ`), instead of right to left.

Our formalization works with sequential colimits specified by a cocone with a
universal property, and results about the standard construction of colimits are
obtained by specialization to the canonical cocone.

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.sequential-colimits using
  ( standard-sequential-colimit -- the canonical colimit type
  ; map-cocone-standard-sequential-colimit -- "the canonical injection"
  ; coherence-cocone-standard-sequential-colimit -- "the glue"
  ; dup-standard-sequential-colimit -- "the induction principle"
  ; up-standard-sequential-colimit -- "the recursion principle"
  )
```

> **Lemma 3.3**: Uniqueness property of the sequential colimit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 3.3.** Uniqueness property of the sequential colimit.
```

The data of a homotopy between two functions out of the standard sequential
colimit is specified by the type `htpy-out-of-standard-sequential-colimit`,
which we can then turn into a proper homotopy.

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.sequential-colimits using
  ( htpy-out-of-standard-sequential-colimit -- data of a homotopy
  ; htpy-htpy-out-of-standard-sequential-colimit -- "data of a homotopy induces a homotopy"
  )
```

> **Definition 3.4**: Natural transformations and natural equivalences between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Definition 3.4.** Natural transformations and natural equivalences between
```

sequential diagrams.

We call natural transformations _morphisms of sequential diagrams_, and natural
equivalences _equivalences of sequential diagrams_.

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.morphisms-sequential-diagrams using
  ( hom-sequential-diagram -- "natural transformation"
  ; id-hom-sequential-diagram -- "identity natural transformation"
  ; comp-hom-sequential-diagram -- "composition of natural transformations"
  )
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.equivalences-sequential-diagrams using
  ( equiv-sequential-diagram -- "natural equivalence"
  )
```

> **Lemma 3.5**: Functoriality of the Sequential Colimit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 3.5.** Functoriality of the Sequential Colimit.
```

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.functoriality-sequential-colimits using
  ( map-hom-standard-sequential-colimit -- "a natural transformation induces a map"
  ; preserves-id-map-hom-standard-sequential-colimit -- "1∞ ~ id(A∞)"
  ; preserves-comp-map-hom-standard-sequential-colimit -- "(σ ∘ τ)∞ ~ σ∞ ∘ τ∞"
  ; htpy-map-hom-standard-sequential-colimit-htpy-hom-sequential-diagram -- "homotopy of natural transformations induces a homotopy"
  ; equiv-equiv-standard-sequential-colimit -- "if τ is an equivalence, then τ∞ is an equivalence"
  )
```

> **Lemma 3.6**: Dropping a head of a sequential diagram preserves the sequential

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 3.6.** Dropping a head of a sequential diagram preserves the sequential
```

colimit.

> **Lemma 3.7**: Dropping finitely many vertices from the beginning of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 3.7.** Dropping finitely many vertices from the beginning of a
```

sequential diagram preserves the sequential colimit.

Denoting by `A[k]` the sequence `A` with the first `k` vertices removed, we show
that the type of cocones under `A[k]` is equivalent to the type of cocones under
`A`, and conclude that any sequential colimit of `A[k]` also has the universal
property of a colimit of `A`. Specializing to the standard sequential colimit,
we get and equivalence `A[k]∞ ≃ A∞`.

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.shifts-sequential-diagrams using
  ( compute-sequential-colimit-shift-sequential-diagram -- "A[k]∞ ≃ A∞"
  )
compute-sequential-colimit-shift-sequential-diagram-once =
  λ l (A : sequential-diagram l) →
    compute-sequential-colimit-shift-sequential-diagram A 1
```

## 4 Fibered Sequences

The fourth section defines fibered sequences, which we call _dependenct
sequential diagrams_ in the library. It introduces the "Σ of a sequence", which
we call the _total sequential diagram_, and asks the main question about the
interplay between Σ and taking the colimit.

The paper defines fibered sequences as a family over the total space
`B : Σ ℕ A → 𝒰`, but we use the curried definition `B : (n : ℕ) → A(n) → 𝒰`.

> **Definition 4.1**: Fibered sequences. Equifibered sequences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Definition 4.1.** Fibered sequences. Equifibered sequences.
```

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.dependent-sequential-diagrams using
  ( dependent-sequential-diagram -- "A sequence (B, b) fibered over (A, a)"
  )
```

> **Lemma 4.2**: The type of families over a colimit is equivalent to the type of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 4.2.** The type of families over a colimit is equivalent to the type of
```

equifibered sequences.

This property is also called the _descent property of sequential colimits_,
because it characterizes families over a sequential colimit.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Definition 4.3**: Σ of a fibered sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Definition 4.3.** Σ of a fibered sequence.
```

```agda
open import synthetic-homotopy-theory.total-sequential-diagrams using
  ( total-sequential-diagram -- "Σ (A, a) (B, b)"
  ; pr1-total-sequential-diagram -- "the canonical projection"
  )
```

> TODO: (C∞, c∞).

Reviewer: If I understood you correctly, do you want this PR merged with these TODO comments littered throughout? I would want this to be written in a more aesthetic way if it is to be merged.

Author: I'm not really sure how to fix this. The construction is not numbered nor named in the paper. I'll just remove it then. Is the aesthetic problem limited to this TODO, or do you mind the other ones to?

## 5 Colimits and Sums

> **Theorem 5.1**: Interaction between `colim` and `Σ`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Theorem 5.1.** Interaction between `colim` and `Σ`.
```

```agda
-- TODO
```

## 6 Induction on the Sum of Sequential Colimits

```agda
-- TODO
```

## 7 Applications of the Main Theorem

> **Lemma 7.1**: TODO description.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 7.1.** TODO description.
```

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Lemma 7.2**: Colimit of the terminal sequential diagram is contractible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 7.2.** Colimit of the terminal sequential diagram is contractible.
```

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Lemma 7.3**: Encode-decode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 7.3.** Encode-decode.
```

This principle is called the _Fundamental theorem of identity types_ in the
library.

```agda
open import foundation.fundamental-theorem-of-identity-types using
  ( fundamental-theorem-id)
```

> **Lemma 7.4**: Characterization of path spaces of images of the canonical maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Lemma 7.4.** Characterization of path spaces of images of the canonical maps
```

into the sequential colimit.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.5**: The loop space of a sequential colimit is the sequential

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.5.** The loop space of a sequential colimit is the sequential
```

colimit of loop spaces.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.6**: For a morphism of sequential diagrams, the fibers of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.6.** For a morphism of sequential diagrams, the fibers of the
```

induced map between sequential colimits are characterized as sequential colimits
of the fibers.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.7.1**: If each type in a sequential diagram is `k`-truncated, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.7.1.** If each type in a sequential diagram is `k`-truncated, then
```

the colimit is `k`-truncated.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.7.2**: The `k`-truncation of a sequential colimit is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.7.2.** The `k`-truncation of a sequential colimit is the
```

sequential colimit of `k`-truncations.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.7.3**: If each type in a sequential diagram is `k`-connected, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.7.3.** If each type in a sequential diagram is `k`-connected, then
```

the colimit is `k`-connected.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.7.4**: If each component of a morphism between sequential diagrams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.7.4.** If each component of a morphism between sequential diagrams
```

is `k`-truncated/`k`-connected, then the induced map of sequential colimits is
`k`-truncated/`k`-connected.

```agda
-- TODO
```

> **Corollary 7.7.5**: If each map in a sequential diagram is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corollary 7.7.5.** If each map in a sequential diagram is
```
